Add blog post for OTel Get Started Survey (#4663)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/otel-get-started-survey/index.md

---
title: Insights from the OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey
linkTitle: OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey

> date: 2024-06-11

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-06-19
```

---
title: Insights from the OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey
linkTitle: OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey
date: 2024-06-11
author: '[Ana Margarita Medina](https://github.com/AnaMMedina21) (ServiceNow)'
issue: 4662
sig: End User SIG
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: 
---

> Getting started with new technologies can be hard, which is why we try to meet our end-users where they are. As a part of that goal, we (the OpenTelemetry End-User SIG) recently surveyed the community to find out how we can best help our users get started with OpenTelemetry. The 104 responses we received will help drive improvements in enablement content from the community as well as vendors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting started with new technologies can be hard, which is why we try to meet our end-users where they are. As a part of that goal, we ([the OpenTelemetry End-User SIG](/community/end-user/)) recently surveyed the community to find out how we can best help our users get started with OpenTelemetry. The 104 responses we received will help drive improvements in enablement content from the community as well as vendors. 
```

Check out the results!

## Key Takeaways
* No matter their level of OTel experience, folks would like to see the following:

>     * #1 Comprehensive documentation (67.3% of respondents)
>     * #2 Reference implementations for instrumentation (65.3% of respondents)
>     * #3 Detailed tutorials (63.4% of respondents)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Comprehensive documentation (67.3% of respondents)
    2. Reference implementations for instrumentation (65.3% of respondents)
    3. Detailed tutorials (63.4% of respondents)
```

* Respondents are mostly working with containers, with 79.8% of respondents using Kubernetes and 63.5% of respondents using Docker
* Over 83% of respondents stated that the Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs & SDKs, and Metrics Specification were the most important in their OTel journey.

## Detailed insights
### Q: What technologies are you using when setting up your observability journey? 

Out of 104 respondents: Respondents are mostly working with containers, with 79.8% of respondents using Kubernetes and 63.5% of respondents using Docker

![Chart showing what technologies are being used](1-technologies-used.png)

### Q: Where in your Observability journey is your organization?

Out of 104 respondents:
* 25% were beginners and they are learning about observability or have used monitoring tools
* 49% were intermediates and were setting up observability practice 
* 26% were experts and have a well-established observability practice

![Chart showing where in their observability journey they are](2-level.png)

### Q: What languages are you using in your organization?

> JavaScript, Java, Go, and Python are the most widely used languages, they are being utilized by over 50% of the respondents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[JavaScript](/docs/languages/js/), [Java](/docs/languages/java/), [Go](/docs/languages/go/), and [Python](/docs/languages/python/) are the most widely used languages, they are being utilized by over 50% of the respondents.
```

> Other languages used included Scala, TypeScript, Erlang/Elixir, Perl, R, Lua, Matlab, Julia, Haskell, COBOL, Kotlin, and SAS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Other languages](/docs/languages/other/) used included Scala, TypeScript, Erlang/Elixir, Perl, R, Lua, Matlab, Julia, Haskell, COBOL, Kotlin, and SAS.
```

![Chart showing what languages are being used](3-languages.png)

### Q: What resources do you wish you had when getting started with OpenTelemetry?

Depending on where in their observability journey they prefer different resources: 

* Those who are learning about observability and those who are setting up an observability practice want comprehensive documentation and detailed tutorials and videos. 
* Those who have a well-established observability practice prefer reference implementations for instrumentation as well as comprehensive documentation. 

![Chart showing what resources folks want](4-resources.png)

### Q: What part of the project is most important to you in your OTel journey?

Most respondents stated that Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs & SDKs and Metrics Specification were considered the most important.

> ![Chart showing what aspects are the most important](5-importance.png)

Reviewer 2: Quite interesting to see that only few people consider LLMs as important to their OTEL journey.
Wondering if it would be nice to point that out too..

Reviewer 3: I also find really interesting that specification and APIs are above the Collector. Sometimes, for those working in observability engineering circles, it feels like the Collector is currently what end-users care the most about (and I'm not saying with this it's not crucial for their operations). Maybe there's something to add here about this fact , which illustrates the importance of OpenTelemetry as a cross-cutting concern within application code?

I think the rest looks great, so I'll leave my approval anyway. This is just a suggestion and feel free to ignore.

Reviewer 4: > Quite interesting to see that only few people consider LLMs as important to their OTEL journey. Wondering if it would be nice to point that out too..

Re: LLMs, I would say that although LLMs were low on the OTel journey scale, this may change in the coming months and years, as LLMs continue to gain traction.

Reviewer 4: > I also find really interesting that specification and APIs are above the Collector. Sometimes, for those working in observability engineering circles, it feels like the Collector is currently what end-users care the most about (and I'm not saying with this it's not crucial for their operations). Maybe there's something to add here about this fact , which illustrates the importance of OpenTelemetry as a cross-cutting concern within application code?
> 
> I think the rest looks great, so I'll leave my approval anyway. This is just a suggestion and feel free to ignore.

Definitely an interesting observation; however, we should probably stick to the facts here, and not try to insert opinion in this type of piece. Just my two cents. 😄

Author: Thinking the same around LLMs, would rather leave as is, and with the collector  also leave as is. Maybe we just make sure to post the results on each of the corresponding SIG's (for the importance question) slack channels to give them the heads up that this information is available

Reviewer 4: I'm fine with that. @AnaMMedina21 can you raise an issue to capture this, and also post the results to the various SIGs?

Author: @avillela listo https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-end-user/issues/43!

---
title: Insights from the OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey
linkTitle: OpenTelemetry Getting Started Survey
date: 2024-06-11
author: '[Ana Margarita Medina](https://github.com/AnaMMedina21) (ServiceNow)'
issue: 4662
sig: End User SIG
---

Getting started with new technologies can be hard, which is why we try to meet

> our end-users where they are. As a part of that goal, we

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
our end-users where they are. As a part of that goal, 
```

> ([the OpenTelemetry End-User SIG](/community/end-user/)) recently surveyed the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[the OpenTelemetry End-User SIG](/community/end-user/) recently surveyed the
```

community to find out how we can best help our users get started with
OpenTelemetry. The 104 responses we received will help drive improvements in
enablement content from the community as well as vendors.

Check out the results!

> ## Key Takeaways

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Key takeaways
```

- No matter their level of OTel experience, folks would like to see the
  following:
  1. Comprehensive documentation (67.3% of respondents)
  2. Reference implementations for instrumentation (65.3% of respondents)
  3. Detailed tutorials (63.4% of respondents)

> - Respondents are mostly working with containers, with 79.8% of respondents

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Respondents are mostly working with containerization technologies, with 79.8% of respondents
```

>   1. Comprehensive documentation (67.3% of respondents)
>   2. Reference implementations for instrumentation (65.3% of respondents)
>   3. Detailed tutorials (63.4% of respondents)
> - Respondents are mostly working with containers, with 79.8% of respondents
>   using Kubernetes and 63.5% of respondents using Docker

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  1. Comprehensive documentation (67.3% of respondents).
  2. Reference implementations for instrumentation (65.3% of respondents).
  3. Detailed tutorials (63.4% of respondents).
- Respondents are mostly working with containers, with 79.8% using Kubernetes and 63.5% using Docker.
```

- Over 83% of respondents stated that the Traces Specification, Instrumentation

>   APIs & SDKs, and Metrics Specification were the most important in their OTel

Reviewer 4: Add links to Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs, SDKs, Metrics Specification

Author: I added links to the corresponding question section, but keeping the `Key takeaways` section link-less

Reviewer 4: Sounds good!

> - Over 83% of respondents stated that the Traces Specification, Instrumentation
>   APIs & SDKs, and Metrics Specification were the most important in their OTel
>   journey.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Over 83% of respondents stated that the Traces Specification, Instrumentation
  APIs and SDKs, and Metrics Specification are the most important aspects of their OTel
  journey.
```

## Detailed insights

### Q: What technologies are you using when setting up your observability journey?

> Out of 104 respondents: Respondents are mostly working with containers, with
> 79.8% of respondents using Kubernetes and 63.5% of respondents using Docker

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Out of 104 respondents, most are working with containers: 79.8% are using Kubernetes and 63.5% are using Docker.
```

![Chart showing what technologies are being used](1-technologies-used.png)

> ### Q: Where in your Observability journey is your organization?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Q: Where in your observability journey is your organization?
```

Out of 104 respondents:

> - 25% were beginners and they are learning about observability or have used
>   monitoring tools
> - 49% were intermediates and were setting up observability practice
> - 26% were experts and have a well-established observability practice

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- 25% are beginners and they are learning about observability or have used
  monitoring tools.
- 49% are intermediates and are setting up observability practice.
- 26% are experts and have a well-established observability practice.
```

![Chart showing where in their observability journey they are](2-level.png)

### Q: What languages are you using in your organization?

> [JavaScript](/docs/languages/js/), [Java](/docs/languages/java/),
> [Go](/docs/languages/go/), and [Python](/docs/languages/python/) are the most
> widely used languages, they are being utilized by over 50% of the respondents.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[JavaScript](/docs/languages/js/), [Java](/docs/languages/java/),
[Go](/docs/languages/go/), and [Python](/docs/languages/python/) are the most
widely used languages. They are being utilized by over 50% of the respondents.
```

> [Other languages](/docs/languages/other/) used included Scala, TypeScript,

Reviewer 4: Add links to these languages

> Erlang/Elixir, Perl, R, Lua, Matlab, Julia, Haskell, COBOL, Kotlin, and SAS.

Reviewer 4: Add links to these languages

Author: Only linked to Erlang/Elixir, but let me know if we should link to the open issues for language support of Julia and Lua

![Chart showing what languages are being used](3-languages.png)

### Q: What resources do you wish you had when getting started with OpenTelemetry?

> Depending on where in their observability journey they prefer different
> resources:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Depending on where in their observability journey they are, respondents prefer different
resources:
```

- Those who are learning about observability and those who are setting up an
  observability practice want comprehensive documentation and detailed tutorials
  and videos.
- Those who have a well-established observability practice prefer reference
  implementations for instrumentation as well as comprehensive documentation.

![Chart showing what resources folks want](4-resources.png)

### Q: What part of the project is most important to you in your OTel journey?

> Most respondents stated that Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs & SDKs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most respondents stated that Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs & SDKs
```

Would be helpful to add links to these

> Most respondents stated that Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs & SDKs
> and Metrics Specification were considered the most important.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Most respondents stated that Traces Specification, Instrumentation APIs and SDKs,
and Metrics Specification are most important to them.
```

> and Metrics Specification were considered the most important.

Reviewer 4: Would be helpful to add links to the Metrics Specification

![Chart showing what aspects are the most important](5-importance.png)

## Learn more

> For a more detailed look at the survey results, you can check out the
> [raw results](https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-end-user/blob/main/end-user-surveys/getting-started/otel-getting-started-survey.csv)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For a more detailed look at the survey results, you can check out the
[raw results](https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-end-user/blob/main/end-user-surveys/getting-started/otel-getting-started-survey.csv).
```

> [raw results](https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-end-user/blob/main/end-user-surveys/getting-started/otel-getting-started-survey.csv)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[results](https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-end-user/tree/main/end-user-surveys/getting-started)
```

## Keep in touch

Thanks to everyone who participated in the survey! We rely on your feedback to
help guide the future development of OpenTelemetry and to ensure it continues to
meet your evolving needs. We will post upcoming surveys in the following
avenues:

- [#otel-sig-end-user Slack channel](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01RT3MSWGZ)
  – you can also reach out to us here!

> - [End user resources page](/community/end-user/)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [End user resources page](/community/end-user/).
```
